Pneumothorax is a condition where air
enters the pleural space,
disrupting the normal negative pressure
that keeps the lungs expanded.
As a result, part or all of the lung
collapses,
leading to impaired ventilation and
potential hypoxemia.
For respiratory therapists, the key is
recognizing how quickly this
can progress and identifying when it
becomes life-threatening.
There are three major types to know.
A spontaneous pneumothorax occurs without
trauma, often in tall,
thin individuals or patients with
underlying lung disease.
A traumatic pneumothorax results from
injury, such as rib fractures
or penetrating wounds.
The most dangerous form is tension
pneumothorax, where air enters
the pleural space but cannot escape,
causing increasing pressure that
shifts mediastinal structures and
compresses the heart and great vessels.
Pathophysiologically, the problem starts
with air in the pleural space.
This eliminates the negative pressure
needed for lung expansion, causing
alveolar collapse.
As the lung collapses, ventilation
decreases while perfusion may still
occur, creating a ventilation-perfusion
mismatch.
In tension pneumothorax, rising pressure
reduces venous return,
leading to hypotension and  Clinically,
patients often present with sudden
dyspnea and unilateral chest pain.
Breath sounds are decreased or absent on
the affected side,
and you may see tachypnea and hypoxemia.
In tension pneumothorax, look for severe
distress,
tracheal deviation away from the affected
side, hypotension,
and signs of shock.
These are critical red flags that require
immediate intervention.
Diagnosis is often confirmed with chest
x-ray, which may
show a visible pleural line and absence of
lung markings.
However, in a suspected tension
pneumothorax,
you do not wait for imaging.
This is a clinical diagnosis.
Management depends on severity.
Small, stable pneumothoraces may only
require oxygen and monitoring.
Larger or symptomatic cases often require
needle aspiration or chest tube placement to remove
air and allow the lung to re-expand.
Tension pneumothorax is a medical
emergency requiring immediate needle decompression followed by chest tube
insertion.
From an RT perspective, your role is
critical.
You assess breath sounds, oxygenation, and
work of breathing, assist with oxygen
therapy,
monitor for deterioration, and support
procedures like needle decompression and
chest tube setup.
You also help recognize when a patient is
transitioning from stable to unstable.
For board prep, remember this.
Sudden dyspnea plus absent breath sounds
on one side should immediately make you think
pneumothorax.
Add hypotension and tracheal deviation,
and you must act fast
for tension pneumothorax.